---
layout: post
tags: [ARM ITM SWO tracing]
title: ARM ITM
---

The open source SWO/ITM/tracing scene has just exploded.

Every few years I have gotten that same frustration: I need to automate or repeat
tracing data from a target MCU. Command line & open source tools, and not using printf.
I do a sweep of the interent, and get nothing that ticks both boxes.
But now, all of a sudden, it feels like there is an abundance of tools
in this niche!

Example code used in this post is again with LibOpenCM3 and the STM32F411-Discovery board
 and my new favourite: orbuculum.

### Links
 - Excellent [blog posting](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/profiling-firmware-on-cortex-m) by François Baldassari. Posted only a week ago!
 - The [Orbuculum](https://github.com/orbcode/orbuculum) tool. (Orbuculum being latin for [crystall ball](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crystal_ball) - very apropos name)
 - [itm tools](https://github.com/japaric/itm-tools)
 - [Another series of blog posts](http://shadetail.com/blog/) on SWO and using Orbuculum.

## ITM printf

The 'hello world' of ITM.

### Target source code
First, in the target source code, redirect file output to ITM by
implementing the `_write` callback: 
```
extern "C" {
#include <libopencm3/cm3/itm.h>
int _write(int file, char *buf, int len)
{
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < len; i++)
	{
		while (ITM_STIM32(0) == 0);
		ITM_STIM8(0) = buf[i];
	}
	return i;
}
}
```

### OpenOCD conf
The ITM module can be enabled directly in the target software, or
via the debugger probe configuration:
```
source [find interface/stlink-v2.cfg]
transport select hla_swd
adapter_khz 4000
source [find target/stm32f4x.cfg]
tpiu  config internal itm.data  uart off  84000000 
itm port 0 on
init
reset run
```
Here the `itm port 0 on` enables the port number 0, the one  the `ITM_*` macros
in the above souce write to.

TPIU clock is the ARM (STM?) "TRACECLK", which in this device is the same as
HCLK, i.e. AHB1 clock, i.e. the main CPU clock. (Getting it wrong will corrupt
the ITM datastream decoding. Getting it almost correct seems to be good enough: 
using 82MHz instead of 84MHz does not seem to corrupt the data. Perhaps this is
just because the printf data stream is slow in comparison?)

Assuming the target device has already been flashed with the ITM-printf-enabled
source code, run `openocd -f <the above openocd conf>`. This will dump the ITM 
datastream to the file `itm.data`

### Orbuculum 

After starting openocd, run: 
```
$ orbuculum -b outputs/ -c 0,out,"%c" -f path/to/itm.data
```
 - `-b outputs/` giving the directory where to produce results
 - `-c 0,out,"%c"` configures ITM port 0 (same number as above) to be directed to outputs/out, and printed as printf-formatted "%c", i.e. text.
 - `-f path/to/itm.data` points to the raw ITM data stream generated by OpenOCD

Now `outputs/out` is a FIFO with the printfs from target. See it with 
```
$ cat outputs/out
```


## Datadumping

`printf()` is nice, but slow. Since ITM is just a data pipe,
data can be dumped directly without formatting. A problem here is that since it is
raw data, the beginning and end of e.g. an array doesn't show up.
In order to do that, use a second stream for synchronization:

```
	for (auto a: buffer) {
		while (ITM_STIM32(1) == 0);
		ITM_STIM16(1) = a;
	}
	while (ITM_STIM32(2) == 0);
	ITM_STIM8(2) = '\n';
```

Remember to enable the new streams, e.g. in the `openocd.cfg`
```
...
itm port 0 on
itm port 1 on
itm port 2 on
...
```

Orbuculum runs the channel processing in separate threads, which leads to mixing of two 
cannels into one output not working. Instead of printing with orbuculum, use orbcat.

Start orbuculum - it automatically dumps ITM data to a TCP connection if connected
```
$ orbuculum -f path/to/itm.data
```

Then start orbcat (which automatically connects to that TCP socket in orbuculum)
```
$ ./ofiles/orbcat  -c1,"%5d " -c2,"%c"
    0   235   143   126    92    85   189    69 
    0   129    29    82   136   207    96    58 
...
``` 
Here orbcat prints channel 1 as 5-character wide number (and a space), 
and channel 2 as characters, all mixed into one. So contents 
of `buffer` in the above example is printed on one line.


## Memory tracing

Once the above is configured correctly, memory can be traced with the DWT (Data Watchpoint and Trace unit).

Figure out the memory address of the variable to trace, and add
into the openocd.cfg.
Reminder: don't take an address of a varaiable on stack and trace that.
There will be noise in the output :) Unless of course the variable is on the 
stack of main()

```
...
mww 0xE0001020 0x2001ffdc
mww 0xE0001028 0x0000000d
init
reset run

``` 
This writes `DWT_COMP0` with the memory address to watch, and 
`DWT_FUNC0` with instructions to create a hardware event whenever that
adress is written to.

(More info on where the DWT registers are in memory in the 
_Cortex-M4 Techical Reference Manual_.
More info on the contentes of the DWT registers are in the _ARMv7-M Architecture
Reference Manual_.)

Orbuculum will dump this info into fifo named `hwevent`, if
the `-b` option (i.e. directory to create the fifos into) is given. 


## Notes

Much more can be done with orbuculum - the links above include examples of loading
execution trace to kcachegrind, or ploting with graphviz. Or `orbtop` for 
a top-like monitor of what is executing on target.

Also, orbuculum seems to be under heavy development. I guess there will be nice
new features available next time I read this :)

All the registers can be written via OpenOCD, or on target or via gdb. Check 
out the gdb macros that come with orbuculum sources!
